Subject: Re: suggestions

Dear Iana,

Thank you for your clear message. Your proposed direction is very sensible, and I think it can become a strong methodological core for the thesis.

I would suggest that you frame the work around the construction of rich, reproducible road-network distance matrices for public-service accessibility and geospatial optimization. In that framing, the present Pandana-based implementation is a useful baseline: it is easy to run from Python, integrates naturally with pandas/parquet workflows, and uses contraction hierarchies to accelerate repeated shortest-path queries. At the same time, your thesis can investigate where the bottlenecks are and which methodological extensions improve scalability.

The current pipeline, in brief, does the following:

1. downloads an OpenStreetMap PBF extract from Geofabrik and a gridded population raster from WorldPop;
2. parses the OSM road network and builds a routable Pandana network;
3. converts WorldPop raster cells into population demand points, optionally with raster aggregation;
4. extracts source locations from OSM amenities, generated candidate grids, or user-provided tables;
5. snaps origins and destinations to the road network;
6. computes a sparse distance matrix with walking/driving access from the source and destination points to the road network plus the road-network distance between the snapped nodes;
7. writes reproducible parquet outputs and a YAML run manifest.

This means that you can study speedups at several levels. First, you can aggregate demand points before routing, for example with the existing grid aggregation parameter or with a clustering method such as MiniBatchKMeans. Second, you can reduce the number of source-destination pairs by using a maximum total-distance threshold or a crow-fly prefilter. Third, you can compare Pandana with routing engines designed for large one-to-many or many-to-many queries, such as r5py, OSRM, Valhalla, NetworKit, or custom sparse graph implementations. I would not try to implement every alternative, but comparing one or two of them experimentally would already be valuable.

For the data section, I think it is acceptable to use Vietnam as a benchmark instance if you describe it as a pipeline-generated case study based on public data sources, not as a dataset you personally collected. The same logic applies to any other country generated by the pipeline. The important point is to document the input sources, the exact run parameters, and the generated output files. You can then add other countries as robustness or scalability examples.

To make this easier, I added a few very small country configurations to the GitHub repository. These were generated through the repository's OpenAI-assisted country-config generator on my machine, inspected manually, and committed as normal Python config files, so you do not need an OpenAI key to rerun them. They are useful for quick tests because the OSM and WorldPop downloads are tiny compared with Vietnam.

The five small standalone Geofabrik examples now available are:

- Monaco
- Nauru
- Tuvalu
- Liechtenstein
- Marshall Islands

Example smoke-test commands:

```powershell
py run_pipeline.py monaco --population-threshold 0 --max-points 10 --amenity school --max-total-dist 25000 --candidate-grid-spacing-m 10000 --candidate-max-snap-dist-m 5000
py run_pipeline.py nauru --population-threshold 0 --max-points 10 --amenity school --max-total-dist 25000 --candidate-grid-spacing-m 10000 --candidate-max-snap-dist-m 5000
py run_pipeline.py tuvalu --population-threshold 0 --max-points 10 --amenity school --max-total-dist 25000 --candidate-grid-spacing-m 10000 --candidate-max-snap-dist-m 5000
py run_pipeline.py liechtenstein --population-threshold 0 --max-points 10 --amenity school --max-total-dist 25000 --candidate-grid-spacing-m 10000 --candidate-max-snap-dist-m 5000
py run_pipeline.py marshall_islands --population-threshold 0 --max-points 10 --amenity school --max-total-dist 25000 --candidate-grid-spacing-m 10000 --candidate-max-snap-dist-m 5000
```

For actual thesis experiments, remove `--max-points 10` and choose a meaningful aggregation setting, for example:

```powershell
py run_pipeline.py liechtenstein --aggregate-factor 5 --amenity school --max-total-dist 25000 --save-map
py run_pipeline.py marshall_islands --aggregate-factor 10 --amenity school --max-total-dist 25000 --save-map
```

One useful observation from preparing these examples is that not every small sovereign state has a standalone Geofabrik country extract. For instance, some literal microstates redirect to the Geofabrik homepage rather than to a `.osm.pbf` file. This is itself worth mentioning briefly in the methodology: Geofabrik is organized hierarchically by continent, region, country, and sometimes subcountry extracts, but the set of standalone extracts is not identical to the list of sovereign states. For reproducible automated work, the pipeline should therefore verify that the configured PBF URL is really a PBF and not an HTML page.

For the thesis timeline, I would work towards a complete first draft before mid-June, with the methodology and computational experiments stabilized earlier if possible. Since your presentation is on 29 June, it would be best to have the main computational story and figures essentially fixed before then, leaving the final weeks for editing, interpretation, and polishing.

With my best regards,

Joaquim
